[shopsys] our backward compatibility promise (#800)
shopsys/shopsys: docs/contributing/backward-compatibility-promise.md

*Note: The same holds true for the [demoshop repository](https://github.com/shopsys/demoshop) which is a complex example of an e-commerce project using a custom design and modifications.*

### PHP Code
Rules for PHP code are fully covered by [Symfony Backward Compatibility Promise](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/bc.html).

### Database Migrations
A new version may include database migrations if the structure of [the entities](/docs/introduction/entities.md) changed.

Migrations in `MINOR` versions are backward-compatible.
It means they may not change types of existing columns, rename columns and tables, and remove nullability of a column.

Migrations in `PATCH` versions are backward-compatible and may be used only for bug fixes.

You should always check and test the database migrations before running them on your production data.

*Tip: Read about the possibilities of altering the execution of DB migration using the [`migrations-lock.yml` file](/docs/introduction/database-migrations.md#locking-the-order-of-migrations).*

### Translation Messages

> New [translation messages](/docs/introduction/translations.md) may be added or have its translation changed in any release.

Author: Good catch!

However, they may be removed or have their message ID changed only in `MAJOR` releases.

When changing the message (eg. because of a typo) in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release, only its translation may be changed.
In such instances, it is preferred to keep using the original message ID to ensure backward compatibility with existing user-defined translation.
This might be unintuitive for contributors because we use English text as message IDs.
See an example of fixing a typo in an English translation message:

Initially, there is only the message ID in the `messages.en.po` (translation doesn't have to be filled if):
```
msgid "Exaple translation"
msgstr ""
```

In a `PATCH` or `MINOR` version, the original message ID may not be removed:
```
msgid "Exaple translation"

> msgstr "Example translation"

Author: Good idea, it looks better:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10008612/52565503-46dc4400-2e07-11e9-91ce-de4a1095bf5f.png)

```

In a `MAJOR` version, the original message ID with the typo may be removed:
```

> msgid "Example translation"

Reviewer: Could you reformat it into `diff` syntax? Like...
```diff
- msgid "Exaple translation"
+ msgid "Example translation"
+ msgstr ""
```

When changing the message (eg. because of a typo) in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release, only its translation may be changed.
In such instances, it is preferred to keep using the original message ID to ensure backward compatibility with existing user-defined translation.
This might be unintuitive for contributors because we use English text as message IDs.
See an example of fixing a typo in an English translation message:

Initially, there is only the message ID in the `messages.en.po` (translation doesn't have to be filled):
```diff
  msgid "Exaple translation"
  msgstr ""
```

In a `PATCH` or `MINOR` version, the original message ID may not be removed:
```diff
  msgid "Exaple translation"
- msgstr ""
+ msgstr "Example translation"
```

In a `MAJOR` version, the original message ID with the typo may be removed:
```diff
- msgid "Exaple translation"
- msgstr "Example translation"
+ msgid "Example translation"
+ msgstr ""
```

### Routing
New routes may be added in any release.
Existing routes should not be modified, except for adding a new [optional placeholder](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/routing/optional_placeholders.html).

> Route names may be changed only in a `MAJOR` release.

Author: This was imo covered in:
>Existing routes should not be modified, except for adding a new optional placeholder.

I wanted to be extra clear about route names (not exactly sure why, when I think about it...).

> Route names may be changed only in a `MAJOR` release.

Author: you're right about it, I've reworded it in e8e82dc21

### Docker Configuration and Orchestration Manifests
Configuration of containers and orchestration is mostly in the `project-base` repository, which means that [it's excluded form the BC promise](#project-base-repository).

The changes should always be described in [upgrade notes](/UPGRADE.md) (in the *Infrastructure* section).

### Twig

> Twig blocks, functions, filters and the templates themselves can be removed or renamed only in a `MAJOR` release.

Author: Well the functions and filters may be changed:
>Changes of Twig functions and filters in `MINOR` and `PATCH` releases must be backward-compatible.
>This means only a new optional argument or a support for new data type of existing argument may be added.

The content of the blocks and templates themselves can also be changed (at least slightly, I'm not sure about any reasonable rule...).

> Changes of Twig functions and filters in `MINOR` and `PATCH` releases must be backward-compatible.

Reviewer: What about HTML structure? How should we deal with changing for example templates in admin (eg. add surrounding `<div>`) and changing blocks (eg. adding surrounding `<picture>` element)?

Reviewer: Maybe there should be a new section ### HTML

Author: Not sure how to deal with that and couldn't find any applicable best practices in other projects.

I would prefer not dealing with it now and add new HTML-related rules when we have some experience. Maybe we find out that it's not even needed or not possible at all...

This means only a new optional argument or a support for new data type of existing argument may be added.

### LESS / CSS
Classes can be renamed only in a `MAJOR` release.

Changes of the visual style of the administration are not considered a BC break and may be introduced in any version.

The style of the front-end is in the `project-base` repository, which means that [it's excluded form the BC promise](#project-base-repository).

### Javascript
Javascript code should adhere to similar rules as the PHP code ([except in project-base repository](#project-base-repository)).

> Behavior of elements with classes prefixed with `.js-` should change only in a `MAJOR` release.

Reviewer: Please separate this sentence into a new paragraph after minor and patch

New keys in a `options` map or a new expected data attribute may be added in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release only if it has a default value.

> Adding a new optional argument to a method is considered a BC break (as it the method might be overridden by the user with the new argument already in use).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a new optional argument to a method is considered as a BC break (as it the method might be overridden by the user with the new argument already in use) and is not allowed in `MINOR` or `PATCH` release.
```

Author: `a method is considered a BC break` is OK imo (https://ludwig.guru/s/it+can+be+considered+a)

I've added the what-it-means part at the end, though

## Summary

> ### If You Are a User of Shopsys Framework...

Reviewer: I suggest to reorder the list by importance (my opinion). Explanation, instruction, nice to read:
* we use Semantic Versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.
* all higher MINOR and PATCH version should be compatible with your project
* use caret version ranges in your composer.json (eg. ^7.0.0)
* when upgrading to a new major release, read the upgrade notes
* watch for changes marked as BC-BREAK in the change log
* don't forget to execute new DB migrations via ./phing db-migrations during upgrades
* it's recommended to always upgrade to the highest minor version first, fix all deprecation notices, and then upgrade to the next major release
* read the section Using Symfony Code in their BC Promise for a nice clarification about BC in PHP
* upgrade often, it will be easier

Author: makes sense, reordered in 0282a8875

Author: :+1:

- we use [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html) (`MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`)

> - all higher `MINOR` and `PATCH` version should be compatible with your project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- all higher `MINOR` and `PATCH` versions should be compatible with your project
```

- read the [section Using Symfony Code](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/bc.html#using-symfony-code) in their BC Promise for a nice clarification about BC in PHP
- use [caret version ranges](https://getcomposer.org/doc/articles/versions.md#caret-version-range-) in your `composer.json` (eg. `^7.0.0`)

> - watch for changes marked as `BC-BREAK` in the [change log](/CHANGELOG.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- watch for changes marked as `BC-BREAK` in the [changelog](/CHANGELOG.md)
```

- don't forget to execute new DB migrations via `./phing db-migrations` during upgrades
- when upgrading to a new major release, read the [upgrade notes](/UPGRADE.md)

> - it's recommended to always upgrade to the highest minor version first, fix all deprecation notices, and then upgrade to the next major release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- we recommend to always upgrade to the highest minor version first, fix all deprecation notices, and then upgrade to the next major release
```

- upgrade often, it will be easier

> ### If You Are a Contributor to Shopsys Framework...

Reviewer: + Test DB migrations heavily

Author: added in 411af721c

- read about [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
- when making a change, always think about backward compatibility

> - instead of removing you can add a deprecation

Reviewer: how? It would be useful to lead user to source "how to add deprecation"

Author: linked in 61a4a776a

> - instead of removing you can add a deprecation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- instead of removing add a deprecation
```

Author: reworded in 61a4a776a

- read the [section Working on Symfony Code](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/bc.html#working-on-symfony-code) in their BC Promise for a nice clarification about BC in PHP

> - try the changes using an older version of `project-base`, it shouldn't cause issue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- test changes using an older version of `project-base`, it shouldn't cause issue
```

Author: applied in 3735f87ac

- never change [translation message IDs](#translation-messages) except in `MAJOR` releases

> - take your time when explaining how to use new features or upgrade to a BC-breaking change in [upgrade notes](/UPGRADE.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- take your time when [explaining](/docs/contributing/guidelines-for-writing-upgrade.md) how to upgrade to a BC-breaking change in [upgrade notes](/UPGRADE.md)
```
I think that new features don't belong to upgrade notes but to changelog

Author: :+1: You are right

I've wanted to mention documenting new features, but it's not important form the BC-Promise point of view.

### HTML
Backward-compatible changes and additions to the HTML structure may be introduced in any release.

Significant changes of the HTML structure should be avoided in `MINOR` and `PATCH` release.
They may be introduced in a `MAJOR` release and they must always be described in detail in [upgrade notes](/UPGRADE.md) (in the *Application* section).

The templates of the front-end are in the `project-base` repository, which means that [they're excluded form the BC promise](#project-base-repository).

### LESS / CSS
Classes can be renamed only in a `MAJOR` release.

Changes of the visual style of the administration are not considered a BC break and may be introduced in any version.

The style of the front-end is in the `project-base` repository, which means that [it's excluded form the BC promise](#project-base-repository).

### Javascript
Javascript code should adhere to similar rules as the PHP code ([except in project-base repository](#project-base-repository)).

New keys in a `options` map or a new expected data attribute may be added in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release only if it has a default value.

> Adding a new optional argument to a method is considered a BC break (as it the method might be overridden by the user with the new argument already in use) and is not allowed in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release.

Author: `a method is considered a BC break` is OK imo 
(https://ludwig.guru/s/it+can+be+considered+a)

I've removed the `it` though

> Adding a new optional argument to a method is considered a BC break (as it the method might be overridden by the user with the new argument already in use) and is not allowed in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release.

Author: @simara-svatopluk also suggested to change it in https://github.com/shopsys/shopsys/pull/800#discussion_r255544787... I might be mistaken but I've read and heard *"it is considered something"* much more that *"it is considered as/like something"*.

> The behavior of elements with classes prefixed with `.js-` should change only in a `MAJOR` release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The behavior of elements with classes prefixed with `.js-` should be changed only in a `MAJOR` release.
```

- we recommend to always upgrade to the highest minor version first, fix all deprecation notices, and then upgrade to the next major release
- read the [section Using Symfony Code](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/bc.html#using-symfony-code) in their BC Promise for a nice clarification about BC in PHP
- upgrade often, it will be easier

### If You Are a Contributor to Shopsys Framework...
- read about [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
- when making a change, always think about backward compatibility
- [add a deprecation](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/conventions.html#deprecations) instead of removing code
- read the [section Working on Symfony Code](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/bc.html#working-on-symfony-code) in their BC Promise for a nice clarification about BC in PHP
- test changes using an older version of `project-base`, it shouldn't cause any issues
- never change [translation message IDs](#translation-messages) except in `MAJOR` releases
- take your time when [explaining](/docs/contributing/guidelines-for-writing-upgrade.md) how to upgrade to a BC-breaking change in [upgrade notes](/UPGRADE.md)

> - test new [database migrations](#database-migrations) heavily

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- test new [database migrations](#database-migrations) thoroughly
```

# Backward Compatibility Promise

Smooth and safe upgrades of your own e-commerce project are very important to us.
In the same time, we need to be able to improve Shopsys Framework for you by adding functionality, enhancing or simplifying current functions and fixing bugs.
After reading this promise you'll understand backward compatibility, what changes you can expect and how we plan to make changes in the future.

> *Note: This BC promise becomes effective with the release first non-beta release (`7.0.0`).*

Reviewer: Maybe `non-pre relase`, because we plan to release also `rc1` if I remember correctly.

Or ... `with the first stable release`

If none of them - there is duplicit `release` word ;-)

Author: `stable` it is

## Releases and Versioning
This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html), which means it's release versions are in format `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`:

- `MAJOR` version may contain incompatible changes
- `MINOR` version may add new functionality in a backward-compatible manner

> - `PATCH` version contains only backward-compatible bug fixes

Reviewer: Imagine a situation:
* we release a version (major/minor)
* after couple of days we find a bug
* the solution for the bug is backward-**incompatible**

What to do in such situation? I think this situation can happen and we should be prepared for it

Author: Well, if it needs to be fixed and cannot be done backward-compatible we'd still have to do it. Maybe let's add a mention about necessary BC breaks for security or critical bugfixes, which would have to include `[BC-BREAK]` in the PR description (meaning it would be included in `CHAGNELOG.md`) and the reason for making the BC break would have to be explained in the description.

Reviewer: Or you can write a *Note* or *Blockquote* that would explain something like "We are doing the best job we can, but we want to be prepared also for situation when it will be necessary to release a patch version that breaks backward compatibility. If this situation occurs, we'll inform you together with instruction what to do"

And you don't have to create rules what will be in PR and so on.

Author: I've added the note in 58d3a8fcd70adb4cc275b69366c47a77cd533463

We expect this period to increase in the future to yearly releases.

## The BC Promise in Detail
Shopsys Framework is built on the shoulders of giants so we've based our BC promise on the [**Symfony Backward Compatibility Promise**](https://symfony.com/doc/3.4/contributing/code/bc.html).
Exceptions from adhering to Symfony's promise and clarifications for non-PHP source codes can be found below.

### Project-base Repository
The [project-base repository](https://github.com/shopsys/project-base) in not meant to be extended or depended upon.
For this reason the changes in it are not subject to the rules of this BC promise.
It should be viewed as a template for your own e-commerce projects built on top of Shopsys Framework.

This means that the `project-base` should run with any higher minor version of Shopsys Framework, up to the next `MAJOR` version.

Changes to the `project-base` may contain new features for front-end or examples of newly implemented features and configuration option.
You can follow the changes in the repository to see how working with Shopsys Framework changes between the versions and to keep in touch with best practices and recommendations.

> During upgrade, you have to make the changes yourself according to the advice in [UPGRADE.md](/UPGRADE.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During upgrade to next major version, you have to make the changes yourself according to the advice in [UPGRADE.md](/UPGRADE.md).
```

# Backward Compatibility Promise

Smooth and safe upgrades of your own e-commerce project are very important to us.
In the same time, we need to be able to improve Shopsys Framework for you by adding functionality, enhancing or simplifying current functions and fixing bugs.
After reading this promise you'll understand backward compatibility, what changes you can expect and how we plan to make changes in the future.

*Note: This BC promise becomes effective with the first stable release (`7.0.0`).*

## Releases and Versioning
This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html), which means it's release versions are in format `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`:

- `MAJOR` version may contain incompatible changes
- `MINOR` version may add new functionality in a backward-compatible manner
- `PATCH` version contains only backward-compatible bug fixes

> Even though we will try to follow these rules the best we can, it could happen that a BC breaking change is introduced in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though we follow these rules, it could rarely happen that a BC breaking change is introduced in a `MINOR` or `PATCH` release.
```

I suggest to emphasize that we are not trying, we are doing! ;-)

Author: fair point, reworded as:

```diff
- Even though we will try to follow these rules the best we can, it could happen ...
+ Even though we keep these rules as best we can, it could happen ...
```
